---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 12-Workflow-Process.md in _episodes_rmd/
title: Workflow Process
teaching: 10
exercises: 15
questions:
  - "How should I plan my data analysis?"
objectives:
  - "Break down an analysis into several small steps"
keypoints:
  - "Data analyses can be broken down into discrete stages"
  - "Most data analysis stages fit into a small number of types"
source: Rmd
---



Now that we've read in some data, we have completed the first step in a data analysis. Before we 
start looking at *how* to analyse our data, it is worth pausing first to ask *what* we actually 
want to do. 

## Analysis design

In designing an analysis, it can help to start at the end. Decide on what your end goal is, and then
work backwards step by step to figure out how to achieve it. As an example using the gapminder data,
suppose a colleague asked you which country had the sixth highest population in 1972. In order to 
answer that, you would need a list of the countries ordered by their population in 1972. To get such
a list, you would first need to extract just the data from 1972 from the complete gapminder set. And 
to extract just the 1972 data (assuming you are doing this analysis in R), you would first need to
import the data from somewhere.

So this very basic analysis has a number of steps to complete:

  * Read gapminder data into R
  * Keep only the data from 1972
  * Sort this data by population size
  * Get the sixth highest population size
  * Look at the country with that population
  * Tell your colleague the country's name
  
> ## Challenge
>
> Think about an analysis you have had to complete recently. Describe the goal of the analysis and
> break down each of the steps required as in the example above. Try to be as specific as possible
> for each step 
>  
> If you don't have an analysis to work with (or one that would take too long to describe), define a
> question you could explore with the gapminder data instead. Try to pick a question that is a little
> more involved than our previous one. For example, which countries are in the top ten life expectancy
> lists for both 1987 and 2007? Or, what was the population increase for Australia between 2002 and
> 2007, and how does that compare to another country of your choice?
{: .challenge}  
  
## From design to implementation
  
Once you have sketched out an analysis, you will have a series of small, self contained steps to 
complete. This maps well onto the [tidyverse philosophy](https://tidyverse.tidyverse.org/articles/manifesto.html)
that each function should be as simple as possible, and do one thing well. Ideally each of your 
analysis steps will correspond to one (or a small number) of tidyverse verbs (data manipulation function) 
that we will cover in the next few lessons. For example, we could take our analysis from before and 
add in some tidyverse verbs without losing the descriptiveness.

  * `read_csv` the gapminder data into R
  * `filter` only the data from 1972 
  * `arrange` this data by population size
  * `filter` the sixth highest population size
  * `select` the country variable with that population
  
Don't worry right now about exactly what these functions do. We will be looking at them in more 
detail shortly.

As you become familiar with these functions and the 'grammar' of the tidyverse, it will become easier
to see how to link them together step by step to complete an analysis. Eventually this process will
become second nature and you will easily be able to break down complex analyses into a series of 
small steps that can solved using a handful of simple functions.
